
1. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2002 Dec;23 Suppl 4:47-54.

Marriage: an evolutionary perspective.

Weisfeld GE(1), Weisfeld CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48207, USA.
weisfeld@sun.science.wayne.edu

Marriage is universal, and pair bonding is found in other species too with highly
dependent young. So marriage functions as a reproductive social arrangement that 
traditionally involved the extended family. The sexes are not identical in their 
biological contributions to children's survival, so they seek somewhat different 
attributes in a mate. Men seek a young, attractive, sexually faithful bride.
Women seek a man who is older, taller, and (as in many other species) socially
dominant. Both sexes prefer a kind, healthy, attractive, similar mate who is
emotionally attached to them. A spouse who fails to maintain sufficiently high
mate value is vulnerable to divorce. Infertility and sexual dissatisfaction
predict divorce, as does death of a child, but the more children, the stabler the
marriage. Cross-cultural data suggest that cruel or subdominant men (e.g., poor
providers) and unfaithful women are prone to divorce. Marriages in which the wife
dominates the husband in economic contributions, nonverbal behavior, and decision
making tend to be less satisfying. In societies in which wives are economically
independent of husbands, divorce rates are high. As women's economic power has
risen with industrialization, divorce rates have climbed. Economic and fitness
considerations also help explain cultural differences in polygyny, age at
marriage, arranged marriage, concern with the bride's sexual chastity, and
marriage ceremonies. Other factors also affect marital dynamics, such as state
subsidies to families, the sex ratio, and influence of the couple's parents.


PMID: 12496735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

